README.md, before:

# lua-datatree-redis

Lua based dataset analyzer tool using redis storage


# Table of Contents
[Requirements](#req)

[Directory structure](#dir_struct)

[Api documentation](#api_doc)

[Usage](#usage)

[Redis Datatree structure](#red_struct)

[How-to](#howto)

[Programming by examples](#prog)



## Requirements  <a name="req"></a>

>**Redis**
>[redis.io](https://redis.io)

for use as rest service
>**OpenResty**
>[openresty.org](https://openresty.org/)

for use from command line
>**redis-lua**
>[nrk/redis-lua](https://github.com/nrk/redis-lua)


## Directory structure <a name="dir_struct"></a>
~~~
lua-datatree-redis
├── cli
│   ├── api
│   │   └── core
|   |       └── __copy_src__content_here__
│   └── test
|	├── indexes.lua
|	├── tables.lua
│       └── sum.lua
├── readme.md
├── resty
│   ├── api
│   │   └── core
│   │       └── __copy_src__content_here__
│   ├── conf
│   │   └── nginx.conf
│   ├── logs
│   ├── rest.lua
│   └── scripts
│       └── test
│           ├── custorders.lua
│           ├── filter.lua
│           ├── report.lua
│           ├── sort.lua
│           └── sum.lua
└── src
    ├── dtcoll.lua
    ├── dtcommon.lua
    ├── dtree_redis.lua
    ├── dtutil_redis.lua
    ├── hlpfunc.lua
    ├── json.lua
    ├── redis_client.lua
    └── redis_client_cli.lua
~~~

## Usage <a name="usage"></a>
### using rest service
1. *install openresty*
2. *create your own workspace and install lua-datatree-redis*
~~~
   mkdir ~/work 
   cd ~/work 
   git clone https://github.com/hipBali/lua-datatree-redis.git
   cd lua-datatree-redis
   cp src/* resty/api/core
   cd resty
   mkdir logs
~~~
 3. *run Nginx rest service*
~~~
   nginx -p `pwd`/ -c conf/nginx.conf
~~~
 4. *create and execute your script*
~~~
   mkdir scripts/myscripts
   nano scripts/myscripts/rest_test.lua
   ...
   curl localhost:8080/myscripts/rest_test
~~~

***simple curl request***
~~~
$ curl localhost:8080/test/sum
~~~
***curl request with parameters***
~~~
$ curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-d '{"customer_id":123, "staff_id":1}' \
localhost:8080/test/filter
~~~

### using command line interface
1. *create your own workspace and install lua-datatree-redis*
~~~
   mkdir ~/work 
   cd ~/work 
   git clone https://github.com/hipBali/lua-datatree-redis.git
   cd lua-datatree-redis
   cp src/* cli/api/core
~~~

2. *create your own workspace*
~~~
   cd ~/work/dtree-redis/cli 
   mkdir mytest
   cd mytest 
~~~
 3. *create your script*
~~~
   nano cli_test.lua
~~~
set the **package.path** variable correctly pointing to ~/work/dtree-redis/cli
~~~
   package.path = "../?.lua;" .. package.path
~~~
 4. *run the script*
~~~
lua cli_test.lua
~~~

### install example database

You will need
>**lua-pump-redis**
>[hipBali/lua-pump-redis](https://github.com/hipBali/lua-pump-redis)

## Redis Datatree structure <a name="red_struct"></a>

### Descriptors
***base***

- format : JSON
- access: GET/SET
- key: -
~~~
{TABLE_NAME: RECORD_COUNT}
~~~

***desc***

- format : JSON
- access: GET/SET
- key: -

~~~
{TABLE_NAME:{
	"index":[
		{"name":INDEX_NAME,
		 "segments":[FIELD_NAME(S)]
		}
	]}
}	
~~~ 

***record***
- format : JSON
- access: GET/SET
- key: TABLE_NAME:ROWID	

***index***
- format : table of integers
- access: SADD/SMEMBERS
- key: TABLE_NAME:INDEX_NAME:INDEX_ROWID


## Api documentation <a name="api_doc"></a>

***DataTree class***

Datatree is a complete representation of the datas loaded into the memory as set of data. Datatree can't be converted  directly to JSON you should use **content()** or **toCollection()** methods to convert it first to a lua table. 
The following methods available to manipulate your dataset.

**select{ }**

Result is the base dataset for further manipulating.
	*parameters:*
- object: 
name of the json object to select as main element of your query
~~~
~~~
- as:
alias for object
- index:
name of required index, default is "pk"
- filter:
table of key-value pairs or function
- fields:
list of fields included in each record, default is all
- limit:
maximum size of result dataset
- range:
table of the first and the last index in processing range
- call:
user defined function wich is called on each records in result dataset and returns the final version of the object

*examples*:

~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", as="MYPROD", limit=3}

-- filter list
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", filter={"product_id=1}}

-- filter function
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", filter=
	function(p) return p.product_id<100 end
	}

-- select fields
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", fields={"product_id","product_name"}}

-- process each objects
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", call=function(o) ... end }
~~~

**join{ }**

Adds related object(s) to your targeted object
	*parameters:*
- on: 
name of the targeted object in the dataset chain, default is the main dataset
~~~
~~~
- as:
alias for object

- index:
name of required index, default is "pk"

- filter:

	- table of key-value pairs or function
	
	or
	
	- function with boolean return value

- fields:
list of fields included in each record, default is all

- limit:
maximum size of result dataset

- merge:

	- boolean parameter, on true the engine will merge the joined object properties with targeted object if the relation of object is 1:1

	or

	- function(target, source)  the engine calls the given function to manage 1:n relation merge

- call:
function(target,source) the engine calls the given function

*example*:

~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS"}
	:join{object="STOCKS",index="idx_product_id"}
	:join{object="STORES", on="STOCKS", merge=true}
~~~

**select_ix{ }**

Performs a quick subselection from given index reference by given item identifier
	*parameters:*
- object: 
name of the json object to select as main element of your query
- item
table of unique id's   
~~~
~~~
- index:
name of required index, default is "pk"
- filter:
table of key-value pairs or function
- fields:
list of fields included in each record, default is all
- limit:
maximum size of result dataset
- call:
user defined function wich is called on each records in result dataset

*example*:
~~~
-- select all products having available stock

ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", call = 
	function(product)
		local ss = ds:select_ix{
			object="STOCKS", 
			index="idx_product_id", 
			item=product.product_id
		}:toCollection()
		if ss:sum("quantity")==0 then
			return nil
		end
		return product
	end
~~~

**func{ }** or **fn{ }**

Calls a function on any element of the dataset chain
	*parameters:*
- on: 
name of the targeted object in the dataset chain which is the input parameter of your function 
- call:
function to call
*example*:
~~~
function fn_stock_calc(stocks)
	...
end

ds:select{object="PRODUCTS"} 		
	:join{object="STOCKS", index="idx_product_id"} 
	:func{on="STOCKS", call = fn_stock_calc}
~~~

**sort{ }**

Calls a sort function on any element of the dataset chain

*parameters:*
- on: 
name of the targeted object in the dataset chain which is will be sorted
- call:
function to call, input parameter is a data collection
*example*:
~~~
-- sort result dataset by date in descending order
ds:select{object="ORDERS", fields={"order_id","customer_id","order_date"}}
:sort{ function(a,b) return a.order_date > b.order_date end } 
~~~

**tc_select{ }**

Same as ___select___ method, but the result will be automatically converted to ___collection___ class. This is the final result of the select ommand only DataCollection methods or lua table functions can be used for further manipulations!

**tc_join{ }**

Same as ___join___ method, but the result will be automatically converted to ___collection___ class. This is the final result of the select-join command chain only DataCollection methods or lua table functions can be used for further manipulations!

---
The datatree object contains raw data including some non relevant informatons beyond what is expected. The following methods will cleanup the result.
**content( )**

Returns datatree content as simple lua table

**toCollection( )**  or **tc( )**

Returns  datatree content as ___collection class___.  

---

***Collection class***

DataCollection is the 'pure data only' part of the DataTree with some useful functions. 

*creating data collection*
~~~
local dtc = require "api.core.dtcoll"
...
local function fn_stock_calc(stocks)
	local sColl = dtc.new(stocks)
~~~

**map( key )**

collects elements in to a map by given key
~~~
local function fn_stock_calc(stocks)
	dtc.new(stocks):map("product_id")
~~~
the result should looks like this 
~~~
# product_id is 311
[311] =     {

# stock information for each store
	# store_id = 1
      [1] =         {
          product_id= 311,
          quantity= 20,
          store_id= 1,
        },
    # store_id = 2
      [2] =         {
          product_id= 311,
          quantity= 27,
          store_id= 2,
        },
    # store_id = 3
      [3] =         {
          product_id= 311,
          quantity= 23,
          store_id= 3,
        },
    }
~~~

**each( function )** and **eachi( function )**

iterator function for the collection

the
**max( key )**
**min( key )**
**sum( key )**
**avg( key )**
**count( )**
**median( key )**

are aggregate functions

**range( vMin, vMax, key )**

returns a part of the collection in given range

**anyOf( values, key )**

returns a part of the collection which are belongs to the set of values

**noneOf( value, key )**

returns a part of the collection which are out of the set of values

**clone( )**

makes a new individual object from the original 

---

## How-to <a name="howto"></a>

### Prepare your query

***cli***
~~~
local redc = require "api.core.redis_client_cli"
local dt_red = require "api.core.dtree_redis"
local json= require "api.core.json"

local red = redc.connect()
local dt = dt_red.new('MY_DB_NAME',red)

local result = dt:select{ ... }
local serializable_datatree

-- result as collection
serializable_datatree = result:tc()
-- result as lua table
serializable_datatree = result:content()

print(json.encode( serializable_datatree ))
~~~

***resty***
~~~
local redc = require "api.core.redis_client"
local dt_red = require "api.core.dtree_redis"

local red = redc.connect()
local dt = dt_red.new('MY_DB_NAME',red)

requestHandler = function()
	local red = redc.connect()
	local dt = dt_red.new('MY_DB_NAME',red)
	local ds = dt:select{ ... }:content()
	return { error=0, result = ds }
end 
~~~

### Get POST params
curl command
~~~
curl \
-X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-d '{"customer_id":123, "staff_id":1}' \
...
~~~
lua script will get the parameters as lua table
~~~
requestHandler = function(par)
	print(par.customer_id)
	print(par.staff_id)
	...
~~~

## Programming by examples <a name="prog"></a>

example database based on ***bikestore*** database
![Bikestore database](to-redis/bikestore_data/SQL-Server-Sample-Database.png)

### select a customer by a filter
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", filter={customer_id=66}}
~~~
### select a customer by special filter function
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", filter=
   function(c)
      return c.first_name:find("Johna") 
   end} 
~~~
### limit result size
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", filter={first_name="Garry"}, limit=1}
~~~
### select some fields of records
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", fields= {"customer_id", "last_name", "first_name"}}
~~~
### add calculated fields to select
This example adds a new field 'name' to the record and removes unneccesary ones assigning its values to nil. The function must be return a lua table containing the new record values.
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", fields= {"customer_id", "last_name", "first_name"}, call=
	function(c)
		c.name = string.format("%s, %s", c.last_name, c.first_name)
		c.last_name = nil 
		c.first_name = nil
		return c
	end}
~~~

### sort/order result with comparator
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", fields= {"customer_id", "last_name"}
:sort{ 
   function(a,b)
     return a.last_name< b.last_name 
   end} 
~~~

### join related table
~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", limit=1} 		
:join{object="BRANDS"} 
~~~
the result data structure should be like
~~~
{"brand_id":9,
"product_name":"Trek 820 - 2016",
"list_price":379.99,
"product_id":1,
"category_id":6,
"model_year":2016,
"BRANDS":[
  {
    "brand_name":"Trek",
    "brand_id":9
  }]
}
~~~
### join and merge
~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", limit=1} 		
:join{object="BRANDS", merge=true} 
~~~
Table PRODUCTS and BRANDS 1:1 related via brand_id and in this case the result will merged to one dimensioned array using the merge=true parameter.
~~~
{
"brand_id":9,
"brand_name":"Trek",
"product_name":"Trek 820 - 2016",
"list_price":379.99,
"product_id":1,
"category_id":6,
"model_year":2016
}
~~~

### change join target
The join method tries to join to the first node of the dataset chain. With the 'on' parameter you can change the default target node to another one.   
~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS"}	
:join{object="BRANDS", merge=true}
:join{object="CATEGORIES", on="PRODUCTS", merge=true}
~~~

### post processing result dataset
 To finalize your result dataset you can use the 'func' method. Any objects at the result tree structure can be accessed with this function and.
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS"}
:join{object="ORDERS", index="idx_customer_id"}
:join{object="ORDER_ITEMS", on="ORDERS", index="idx_order_id"}
:func{ on="ORDERS", call=calc_total }
:func{ call=finalize }
~~~
The function 'calc_total' will recive the parameter:
- ORDERS as DataCollection
~~~
	ORDERS [DataCollection]
	├── order 1
	│   └── ORDER_ITEMS [table]
	|       ├── order item 1
	│       └── order item n
	└── order n
	    └── ORDER_ITEMS [table]
	        ├── order item 1
	        └── order item n
~~~

The function 'finalize ' will recive the root object of the tree as parameter:
- CUSTOMERS as DataCollection 
 
 ### using alias parameter
The join method tries to join to the last node of the dataset chain. With the 'on' parameter you can change the default target node to another one.   
~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", as="BIKES"}	
:join{object="CATEGORIES", on="BIKES"}
~~~

## License


BSD 2-Clause License
Copyright (c) 2022, hipBali
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

Commit message:

added link parameter description to join

README.md, after:

# lua-datatree-redis

Lua based dataset analyzer tool using redis storage


# Table of Contents
[Requirements](#req)

[Directory structure](#dir_struct)

[Api documentation](#api_doc)

[Usage](#usage)

[Redis Datatree structure](#red_struct)

[How-to](#howto)

[Programming by examples](#prog)



## Requirements  <a name="req"></a>

>**Redis**
>[redis.io](https://redis.io)

for use as rest service
>**OpenResty**
>[openresty.org](https://openresty.org/)

for use from command line
>**redis-lua**
>[nrk/redis-lua](https://github.com/nrk/redis-lua)


## Directory structure <a name="dir_struct"></a>
~~~
lua-datatree-redis
├── cli
│   ├── api
│   │   └── core
|   |       └── __copy_src__content_here__
│   └── test
|	├── indexes.lua
|	├── tables.lua
│       └── sum.lua
├── readme.md
├── resty
│   ├── api
│   │   └── core
│   │       └── __copy_src__content_here__
│   ├── conf
│   │   └── nginx.conf
│   ├── logs
│   ├── rest.lua
│   └── scripts
│       └── test
│           ├── custorders.lua
│           ├── filter.lua
│           ├── report.lua
│           ├── sort.lua
│           └── sum.lua
└── src
    ├── dtcoll.lua
    ├── dtcommon.lua
    ├── dtree_redis.lua
    ├── dtutil_redis.lua
    ├── hlpfunc.lua
    ├── json.lua
    ├── redis_client.lua
    └── redis_client_cli.lua
~~~

## Usage <a name="usage"></a>
### using rest service
1. *install openresty*
2. *create your own workspace and install lua-datatree-redis*
~~~
   mkdir ~/work 
   cd ~/work 
   git clone https://github.com/hipBali/lua-datatree-redis.git
   cd lua-datatree-redis
   cp src/* resty/api/core
   cd resty
   mkdir logs
~~~
 3. *run Nginx rest service*
~~~
   nginx -p `pwd`/ -c conf/nginx.conf
~~~
 4. *create and execute your script*
~~~
   mkdir scripts/myscripts
   nano scripts/myscripts/rest_test.lua
   ...
   curl localhost:8080/myscripts/rest_test
~~~

***simple curl request***
~~~
$ curl localhost:8080/test/sum
~~~
***curl request with parameters***
~~~
$ curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-d '{"customer_id":123, "staff_id":1}' \
localhost:8080/test/filter
~~~

### using command line interface
1. *create your own workspace and install lua-datatree-redis*
~~~
   mkdir ~/work 
   cd ~/work 
   git clone https://github.com/hipBali/lua-datatree-redis.git
   cd lua-datatree-redis
   cp src/* cli/api/core
~~~

2. *create your own workspace*
~~~
   cd ~/work/dtree-redis/cli 
   mkdir mytest
   cd mytest 
~~~
 3. *create your script*
~~~
   nano cli_test.lua
~~~
set the **package.path** variable correctly pointing to ~/work/dtree-redis/cli
~~~
   package.path = "../?.lua;" .. package.path
~~~
 4. *run the script*
~~~
lua cli_test.lua
~~~

### install example database

You will need
>**lua-pump-redis**
>[hipBali/lua-pump-redis](https://github.com/hipBali/lua-pump-redis)

## Redis Datatree structure <a name="red_struct"></a>

### Descriptors
***base***

- format : JSON
- access: GET/SET
- key: -
~~~
{TABLE_NAME: RECORD_COUNT}
~~~

***desc***

- format : JSON
- access: GET/SET
- key: -

~~~
{TABLE_NAME:{
	"index":[
		{"name":INDEX_NAME,
		 "segments":[FIELD_NAME(S)]
		}
	]}
}	
~~~ 

***record***
- format : JSON
- access: GET/SET
- key: TABLE_NAME:ROWID	

***index***
- format : table of integers
- access: SADD/SMEMBERS
- key: TABLE_NAME:INDEX_NAME:INDEX_ROWID


## Api documentation <a name="api_doc"></a>

***DataTree class***

Datatree is a complete representation of the datas loaded into the memory as set of data. Datatree can't be converted  directly to JSON you should use **content()** or **toCollection()** methods to convert it first to a lua table. 
The following methods available to manipulate your dataset.

**select{ }**

Result is the base dataset for further manipulating.
	*parameters:*
- object: 
name of the json object to select as main element of your query
~~~
~~~
- as:
alias for object
- index:
name of required index, default is "pk"
- filter:
table of key-value pairs or function
- fields:
list of fields included in each record, default is all
- limit:
maximum size of result dataset
- range:
table of the first and the last index in processing range
- call:
user defined function wich is called on each records in result dataset and returns the final version of the object

*examples*:

~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", as="MYPROD", limit=3}

-- filter list
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", filter={"product_id=1}}

-- filter function
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", filter=
	function(p) return p.product_id<100 end
	}

-- select fields
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", fields={"product_id","product_name"}}

-- process each objects
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", call=function(o) ... end }
~~~

**join{ }**

Adds related object(s) to your targeted object
	*parameters:*
- on: 
name of the targeted object in the dataset chain, default is the main dataset
~~~
~~~
- as:
alias for object

- index:
name of required index, default is "pk"

- link:
name of field to create 1:1 join with automatic merge

- filter:

	- table of key-value pairs or function
	
	or
	
	- function with boolean return value

- fields:
list of fields included in each record, default is all

- limit:
maximum size of result dataset

- merge:

	- boolean parameter, on true the engine will merge the joined object properties with targeted object if the relation of object is 1:1

	or

	- function(target, source)  the engine calls the given function to manage 1:n relation merge

- call:
function(target,source) the engine calls the given function

*example*:

~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS"}
	:join{object="STOCKS",index="idx_product_id"}
	:join{object="STORES", on="STOCKS", merge=true}
~~~

**select_ix{ }**

Performs a quick subselection from given index reference by given item identifier
	*parameters:*
- object: 
name of the json object to select as main element of your query
- item
table of unique id's   
~~~
~~~
- index:
name of required index, default is "pk"
- filter:
table of key-value pairs or function
- fields:
list of fields included in each record, default is all
- limit:
maximum size of result dataset
- call:
user defined function wich is called on each records in result dataset

*example*:
~~~
-- select all products having available stock

ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", call = 
	function(product)
		local ss = ds:select_ix{
			object="STOCKS", 
			index="idx_product_id", 
			item=product.product_id
		}:toCollection()
		if ss:sum("quantity")==0 then
			return nil
		end
		return product
	end
~~~

**func{ }** or **fn{ }**

Calls a function on any element of the dataset chain
	*parameters:*
- on: 
name of the targeted object in the dataset chain which is the input parameter of your function 
- call:
function to call
*example*:
~~~
function fn_stock_calc(stocks)
	...
end

ds:select{object="PRODUCTS"} 		
	:join{object="STOCKS", index="idx_product_id"} 
	:func{on="STOCKS", call = fn_stock_calc}
~~~

**sort{ }**

Calls a sort function on any element of the dataset chain

*parameters:*
- on: 
name of the targeted object in the dataset chain which is will be sorted
- call:
function to call, input parameter is a data collection
*example*:
~~~
-- sort result dataset by date in descending order
ds:select{object="ORDERS", fields={"order_id","customer_id","order_date"}}
:sort{ function(a,b) return a.order_date > b.order_date end } 
~~~

**tc_select{ }**

Same as ___select___ method, but the result will be automatically converted to ___collection___ class. This is the final result of the select ommand only DataCollection methods or lua table functions can be used for further manipulations!

**tc_join{ }**

Same as ___join___ method, but the result will be automatically converted to ___collection___ class. This is the final result of the select-join command chain only DataCollection methods or lua table functions can be used for further manipulations!

---
The datatree object contains raw data including some non relevant informatons beyond what is expected. The following methods will cleanup the result.
**content( )**

Returns datatree content as simple lua table

**toCollection( )**  or **tc( )**

Returns  datatree content as ___collection class___.  

---

***Collection class***

DataCollection is the 'pure data only' part of the DataTree with some useful functions. 

*creating data collection*
~~~
local dtc = require "api.core.dtcoll"
...
local function fn_stock_calc(stocks)
	local sColl = dtc.new(stocks)
~~~

**map( key )**

collects elements in to a map by given key
~~~
local function fn_stock_calc(stocks)
	dtc.new(stocks):map("product_id")
~~~
the result should looks like this 
~~~
# product_id is 311
[311] =     {

# stock information for each store
	# store_id = 1
      [1] =         {
          product_id= 311,
          quantity= 20,
          store_id= 1,
        },
    # store_id = 2
      [2] =         {
          product_id= 311,
          quantity= 27,
          store_id= 2,
        },
    # store_id = 3
      [3] =         {
          product_id= 311,
          quantity= 23,
          store_id= 3,
        },
    }
~~~

**each( function )** and **eachi( function )**

iterator function for the collection

the
**max( key )**
**min( key )**
**sum( key )**
**avg( key )**
**count( )**
**median( key )**

are aggregate functions

**range( vMin, vMax, key )**

returns a part of the collection in given range

**anyOf( values, key )**

returns a part of the collection which are belongs to the set of values

**noneOf( value, key )**

returns a part of the collection which are out of the set of values

**clone( )**

makes a new individual object from the original 

---

## How-to <a name="howto"></a>

### Prepare your query

***cli***
~~~
local redc = require "api.core.redis_client_cli"
local dt_red = require "api.core.dtree_redis"
local json= require "api.core.json"

local red = redc.connect()
local dt = dt_red.new('MY_DB_NAME',red)

local result = dt:select{ ... }
local serializable_datatree

-- result as collection
serializable_datatree = result:tc()
-- result as lua table
serializable_datatree = result:content()

print(json.encode( serializable_datatree ))
~~~

***resty***
~~~
local redc = require "api.core.redis_client"
local dt_red = require "api.core.dtree_redis"

local red = redc.connect()
local dt = dt_red.new('MY_DB_NAME',red)

requestHandler = function()
	local red = redc.connect()
	local dt = dt_red.new('MY_DB_NAME',red)
	local ds = dt:select{ ... }:content()
	return { error=0, result = ds }
end 
~~~

### Get POST params
curl command
~~~
curl \
-X POST \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-d '{"customer_id":123, "staff_id":1}' \
...
~~~
lua script will get the parameters as lua table
~~~
requestHandler = function(par)
	print(par.customer_id)
	print(par.staff_id)
	...
~~~

## Programming by examples <a name="prog"></a>

example database based on ***bikestore*** database
![Bikestore database](to-redis/bikestore_data/SQL-Server-Sample-Database.png)

### select a customer by a filter
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", filter={customer_id=66}}
~~~
### select a customer by special filter function
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", filter=
   function(c)
      return c.first_name:find("Johna") 
   end} 
~~~
### limit result size
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", filter={first_name="Garry"}, limit=1}
~~~
### select some fields of records
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", fields= {"customer_id", "last_name", "first_name"}}
~~~
### add calculated fields to select
This example adds a new field 'name' to the record and removes unneccesary ones assigning its values to nil. The function must be return a lua table containing the new record values.
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", fields= {"customer_id", "last_name", "first_name"}, call=
	function(c)
		c.name = string.format("%s, %s", c.last_name, c.first_name)
		c.last_name = nil 
		c.first_name = nil
		return c
	end}
~~~

### sort/order result with comparator
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS", fields= {"customer_id", "last_name"}
:sort{ 
   function(a,b)
     return a.last_name< b.last_name 
   end} 
~~~

### join related table
~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", limit=1} 		
:join{object="BRANDS"} 
~~~
the result data structure should be like
~~~
{"brand_id":9,
"product_name":"Trek 820 - 2016",
"list_price":379.99,
"product_id":1,
"category_id":6,
"model_year":2016,
"BRANDS":[
  {
    "brand_name":"Trek",
    "brand_id":9
  }]
}
~~~
### join and merge
~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", limit=1} 		
:join{object="BRANDS", merge=true} 
~~~
Table PRODUCTS and BRANDS 1:1 related via brand_id and in this case the result will merged to one dimensioned array using the merge=true parameter.
~~~
{
"brand_id":9,
"brand_name":"Trek",
"product_name":"Trek 820 - 2016",
"list_price":379.99,
"product_id":1,
"category_id":6,
"model_year":2016
}
~~~

### change join target
The join method tries to join to the first node of the dataset chain. With the 'on' parameter you can change the default target node to another one.   
~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS"}	
:join{object="BRANDS", merge=true}
:join{object="CATEGORIES", on="PRODUCTS", merge=true}
~~~

### post processing result dataset
 To finalize your result dataset you can use the 'func' method. Any objects at the result tree structure can be accessed with this function and.
~~~
ds:select{object="CUSTOMERS"}
:join{object="ORDERS", index="idx_customer_id"}
:join{object="ORDER_ITEMS", on="ORDERS", index="idx_order_id"}
:func{ on="ORDERS", call=calc_total }
:func{ call=finalize }
~~~
The function 'calc_total' will recive the parameter:
- ORDERS as DataCollection
~~~
	ORDERS [DataCollection]
	├── order 1
	│   └── ORDER_ITEMS [table]
	|       ├── order item 1
	│       └── order item n
	└── order n
	    └── ORDER_ITEMS [table]
	        ├── order item 1
	        └── order item n
~~~

The function 'finalize ' will recive the root object of the tree as parameter:
- CUSTOMERS as DataCollection 
 
 ### using alias parameter
The join method tries to join to the last node of the dataset chain. With the 'on' parameter you can change the default target node to another one.   
~~~
ds:select{object="PRODUCTS", as="BIKES"}	
:join{object="CATEGORIES", on="BIKES"}
~~~

## License


BSD 2-Clause License
Copyright (c) 2022, hipBali
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
